Previously on The Exorcist...
TOMAS:
God gives you a job to do.
And when that happens,
you have to
drop everything
and just start walking.
God spoke to me today.
Ah.
He said,
"I want you
to help this family, Tomas."
(speaking Spanish
in old woman's voice)
SIMON:
Vocare Pulvere.
Take me.
(gasping)
ANGELA:
Desperation
with notes of mediocrity.
You're never gonna
be one of us.
(speaking French)
(grunting)
Did you kill Bennett?
Ipse venit.
"He is coming."
You're gonna kill the Pope.
(gasping)
(door opening)
(grunting)
(demonic voice):
Sorry, Mommy.
Show's over.
Time to give the people
what they want.
Casey.
(bones cracking)
Casey, no!
No!
Take me instead.
ANGELA:
I'm not possessed.
This is integration.
She invited me in.
Don't you understand?
This is permanent.
She's not Mom.
I don't know
how it happened,
but he left me
and went to her.
We have to leave
this house, now.
Okay.
(air rushing)
Time for a family meeting.
(gasping)
ANGELA: I need to hear you
say you'll behave.
KAT: We'll behave!
Please, let her go!
I don't believe you.
(gagging)
Angela!
Please!
(door slams open)
Get the hell away from them.
(breathing heavily)
Now, this just got interesting.
Is everyone okay?
Not really.
KAT:
Please,
you have to help her.
ANGELA:
Mmm.
By all means, help me.
Am I speaking now to the
presence inside Angela Rance?
I'm not possessed, Father.
This is integration.
You know what that means.
There's no Angela left to save.
No prayer that's gonna
bring her back.
There is just me.
I don't believe that
you're integrated.
Which begs the question,
how far are you willing
to take this?
As far as it goes.
Here I thought you were
the cuddly one.
Well, then,
man of God,
let's see the measure
of your conviction.
I cast you out, unclean spirit!
(gasps)
(all gasping)
(screaming)
(yelling, panting)
(Tomas' panting echoes)
(dog barking, men
speaking Spanish in distance)
(speaking Spanish)
You certainly stepped
in it this time.
Marcus?
*
SIMON:
Well, it appears
our friend Angela
won't be joining us, after all.
(breathing heavily)
Domestic trouble.
Such a pity.
MARIA: Simon, I need
to speak with you.
SIMON: Later.
I harvested those ashes.
My people, my work.
They were promised to me.
Oh, Maria, I hope you're not
giving me orders.
It's just that
you promised.
I promised you
due consideration,
which you received.
It's not my fault
you were unsatisfactory.
MARCUS (whispers):
Bennett.
Good news.
You know that mole
inside the church?
I'm starting to think
I might be
onto something.
Guess we can all go home, then.
(Simon chuckles)
The special security liaison
to the Vatican itself,
and Rome's
greatest living exorcist.
The politician and the pit bull.
Either one
would be a feather
fit for the finest cap.
You have two doors
set before you.
(electrical buzzing)
Behind the first door,
is integration.
Join us of your own volition,
and you will know
wealth and power
beyond imagining.
You will drink from
the cupped hands of eternity.
Or choose the second door
and die.
MARCUS:
All eternity
listening to your poncey
little speeches?
Kill me now.
Oh, it's easy to be cavalier
about death
in the abstract.
It's much harder
when one is actually
dying.
(yelling)
You bastard!
Case in point.
(Marcus grunting)
(gasping)
Oh, I'd decide quickly
if I were you.
Ticktock, my lovelies.
*
(dog barking in distance)
This is where I lived
when I was six years old,
with my grandmother.
And now you're back.
No.
I'm dreaming.
This is not real.
You are not real.
Oh, you're gonna
hurt my feelings.
What do you want?
For you to accept
the inevitable.
Integration is permanent,
Tomas.
You can't beat her.
(chuckles)
(chuckling)
Hell, even I couldn't beat her
and I'm actually good at this.
You're not Marcus.
And you're not an exorcist.
Do you remember what I told you?
That I had too much to lose.
Yeah, and then
what happened?
You lost the Rance girl,
you lost the love of your life,
you betrayed everything
you held dear, and for what?
What did it get you?
You're gonna die
in here.
Unless you wake up right now.
TOMAS:
But I don't know how.
Yeah, you do.
ANGELA:
We have a problem.
The world is
about to change,
starting with a pig
in a little white hat,
bleeding out for
all the world to see.
And that kind of change
brings opportunities.
Opportunities that vanish
if my entire family
turns up dead.
And I don't want that. Do you?
I don't want to hurt any of you.
You just got done
choking our daughter.
Well, I was just
disciplining her.
You took my wife.
I took what was mine!
I'm going to kill you.
Now, that's the kind of talk
that we just can't afford.
Marcus is gonna find you.
Well, then, I'll kill him, too.
Really? The way I heard it,
you got your ass handed to you
by a 12-year-old girl.
What kind of all-powerful
demon lets himself
get chucked
out a window?
(demonic voice echoing):
Regan.
SALESMAN:
I thought I got
every last piece of you.
I should've known.
You've been hiding from me.
Like a remora,
sucking on the belly
of a shark.
Hello...
Little Rags
found herself a burrow.
All those years ago.
A place
where you wouldn't feel
anything at all.
(scraping on walls)
And first sign of trouble,
you went scampering back.
(sing-songy):
Little pig.
Let me in!
(pounds on door)
Ah!
You're going to
open the door for me
when you hear what I do
to your wretched family.
Please.
Let them go.
The sounds
they're going to make.
(scraping, then Henry,
Kat, Casey screaming)
I know what you are.
Demon.
Doesn't work like that,
I'm afraid.
Splitting consciousness, all
that bollocks. Hollywood stuff.
I'm you, Tomas.
I'm that little voice
in the back of your head.
I'm every rotten lie
you've ever told.
I'm not a liar.
Oh, really?
You lied about Jessica,
you lied about
hearing God's voice--
that was a personal favorite.
(imitating Tomas crying):
"Look at this family.
See how they are suffering."
I was trying to help.
You were trying
to be special.
You were trying to
pass the buck on every lousy
decision you've ever made.
God didn't want you, Tomas.
He never did.
The first Mexican Pope.
Do you think anyone ever
believed that pile of old tosh?
Stop it!
(breathing heavily)
Your grandma didn't want you
in the Vatican,
she wanted you holding her hand
while she died, but you couldn't
even manage that, could you?
(old woman humming)
(rattling breaths,
humming continues)
(speaks Spanish)
No.
(wheezing, coughing)
(tooth rattles on floor)
TOMAS:
No.
(coughing and
rattling breathing continues)
(whispering):
Truth is, it took weeks.
Weeks, Tomas.
Oh yeah, prayer,
'cause that always works,
doesn't it?
The thing about
bed sores is, eventually,
(breathing heavily)
you become part
of the mattress.
They try and pull you free,
but it's like tearing wet paper.
They open the window
'cause of the smell.
(bones cracking)
(whispering):
That's how the cats got in.
First thing they
went for was the face.
(yells in disgust)
No, that's now how it happened,
I spoke with her
the day before she died.
She said she was proud of me.
MARCUS:
You spoke to her
two weeks before she died.
In the end,
she couldn't even form words.
Withering away into nothing
in that bed.
Look at her.
It's the least you can do.
(rattling breathing,
softly whimpering)
(sobbing)
MARCUS:
Is this what your God wanted?
Look at her.
Was this part of His plan?
(Marcus chuckles)
SIMON:
Drip, drip, drip.
I read about your
time at the boys' home
where they found you.
Shot your own pa
with a poaching rifle.
What's your point?
Why do you think
the Church took you in?
Because of your potential?
Or because they saw
a scared, troubled
child, and knew that
all it would take
was one little push to make you
kill and kill again?
It didn't take much convincing.
That's your legacy.
A lonely trail
that ends in a dreary room
without a single soul
to mourn your passing.
Why die for them, Marcus?
For a Church who never gave
one single damn about you?
He's lying.
No, he isn't.
The parade starts
in ten minutes.
We're running out of time.
They wrung your soul
like a piece of wet laundry.
And after they squeezed
every last drop of
good out of your body,
what did they do?
Excommunication.
Oh, my poor boy.
Don't let your life
be the last thing
they take.
Six blind men...
go into a room.
There's an elephant...
in the room
and they all grab a part,
the trunk,
the-the ear, the tail.
All of them trying to describe
that one little piece
of something greater.
I'm familiar with the story.
Then you should know...
that you're wasting your time.
'Cause I didn't
touch a trunk,
or a tail, or an ear.
I saw the whole damn elephant!
12 years old,
staring down
one of your bastard brothers!
And the world
cracked in half.
And I saw God
on the other side.
(sobbing)
I'm not dying
for the bloody Church.
I am dying for Him.
Simon, we need to leave.
Vocare Pulvere.
(blows)
(electricity buzzes)
(ghostly breathing)
Stop. Wait!
I brought Sebastian.
It was my money,
my resources...
Know your place.
The oxen pulls the plow, Maria.
He doesn't sit
at the farmer's table.
(door closes)
(ghostly breathing resumes)
ANGELA:
We're gonna play a little game.
A game that can end at any time.
And all you have to do, Regan,
is open the damn...
door.
'Round and 'round we go.
(softly):
Oh, my God.
(Angela gasps)
Looks like
we have a winner.
The birdie with
the broken wing.
Aw.
Casey, dear.
I want you to pick up
that hammer.
Let's go.
Come on.
There we go.
Good.
It's okay, baby.
Yeah.
Pick it up.
Good.
There you go.
Now come on over here.
And what I want you to do
with that hammer
is to hit your sister.
Just as hard as you can.
(softly):
What?
ANGELA: Start with the knee.
HENRY: Don't.
Don't do it.
We're not gonna play
your sick little games.
I'm gonna give you until
the count of ten to do it.
Otherwise, I'm gonna tear
both of Daddy Dearest's
arms off.
(rumble, then bones cracking)
No!
(gasping and yelling)
One.
Two.
CASEY: Please, you don't
have to do this, please.
Three.
(crying): Please, no, please!
Listen to me.
I love you both so much.
CASEY: No!
Four.
CASEY:
Please, please don't do this.
HENRY:
Okay, this is not...
this is not your fault,
do you hear me?
CASEY: No!
Five.
Daddy, no.
HENRY:
Every day I wake up,
I'm so proud,
I'm so proud to be your dad.
Six.
Please, please, no!
CASEY: Please.
Do it, Case.
Oh!
Seven.
HENRY:
And your mom,
your mom loves you too.
CASEY:
No, please.
You can't ever forget...
you can't ever forget that!
Eight.
Do it!
I can't!
CASEY: I can't.
Nine.
No!
(Kat screaming)
(rumbling stops)
(laughing)
(gasping and crying)
(sobbing):
No! Leave them alone!
Oh, God.
They didn't do anything.
Leave them alone!
(cries and gasps echoing)
You don't get to run from me.
You don't get
to say no.
All you can do
is open the door
and let me...
in.
(wheezing)
(coughing)
(indistinct demonic whispers)
Ana?
Is that you?
Don't listen to it,
Bennett.
My sister.
I can hear her.
You have to fight this.
Ana...
I'm sorry.
Poor little Renfield.
Left all alone
to eat your bugs.
Be quiet.
Do you remember what
happened to Renfield
at the end of the book?
The vampire
crushed his face
and snapped his neck.
You have no idea
the things I've done.
I know you're still
on the bench,
waiting for a call
that's never gonna come.
Renfield!
(indistinct whispering
continues)
Ah...
there you are.
How many times
have you been passed over
for someone younger,
more desirable?
How many times do they
choose a man instead?
Oh, you give 'em
some sweet girl,
they can't wait
to pluck that flower.
But shove a couple
of miles on the clock,
who do they go for?
A man!
Shut up!
Too afraid to take
what's rightfully yours.
Ana, I'm ready.
I am your daughter.
Take me!
(demonic hissing)
(gasping)
(demonic growling)
(wood cracking)
Bennett!
(demonic growling)
Aah!
(bones snap)
Sebastian.
I know.
(groaning quietly)
HENRY: Easy...
MARCUS:
Spend your whole life
denying your nature,
and for what, Tomas?
What are you left with?
Nothing.
Another one of God's
abandoned projects.
Unfinished,
unnoticed,
unloved.
I don't want to be here.
I want to wake up.
Wake up, wake up,
wake up!
(Kat gasping, groaning)
So wake... up.
(Kat gasping)
Oh, my God, Father Tomas,
wake up!
(echoing):
Father Tomas, wake up!
Wake up!
Suicide is a mortal sin.
My soul would be
condemned to Hell.
What are you doing, Tomas?
(Kat panting)
(Kat groans)
Who's ready for round two?
You were right.
I have sinned.
I lied to myself.
I lied
to the people around me.
Mom...
I know you're listening.
I know it's hard, and it hurts,
but you have to fight.
You know what?
(hammer thuds on floor)
I think we've had just about
enough of you, Stinkpot.
No! Stop!
Let her go!
TOMAS:
I told myself I was special.
I gave into temptation.
CASEY:
Stop!
When my grandmother needed me,
I was not there.
When Jessica came to me,
I was not strong.
When Angela asked
for my help...
I was not honest.
(crying out)
HENRY: Stop, Angela!
(growling)
Stop it!
I know you're in there.
You said
I have nothing.
You were wrong.
I have love.
I have hope.
And I have faith.
(voices echoing)
HENRY: Stop it!
TOMAS: These things
are not weaknesses.
They make me what I am.
And what's that?
An exorcist.
HENRY: Angela, stop it!
KAT: Stop! Let her go.
You have got
to be kidding me.
The blood of Christ
redeems you.
The mercy of Christ
absolves you.
The power of Christ
compels you!
(demonic growl, glass shatters)
(crashing, thudding)
TOMAS:
The power of Christ compels you!
It's He who casts you out,
from whose sight
nothing is hidden.
(furniture crashes)
It is He who repels you,
to whose might
all things are subject.
It's He who expels you.
He who has prepared...
(furious demonic growling)
(Tomas praying loudly,
indistinctly)
(demonic growling)
(praying continues,
glass shattering)
HENRY: What are you doing, Case?
Come on, we gotta go!
I'm sorry, I can't.
Casey!
TOMAS:
I command you, unclean spirit,
along with all your minions
now attacking
this servant of God,
by the mysteries
of the Incarnation,
Passion, Resurrection
and Ascension
of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by the coming of
our Lord for judgment,
that you tell me
by some sign your name,
and the day and hour
of your departure!
(crowd chattering)
(cheering)
(panting)
(cheering continues)
TOMAS:
The power of Christ compels you
by the coming of our Lord
for judgment,
that you tell me by some sign
your name...
(demonic voice):
The real priest couldn't come,
so they sent you instead.
Our Father,
who art in Heaven...
Tiny Tomas.
You're drowning
by the second.
...hallowed be Thy name.
ALL: Thy kingdom come,
Thy will be done,
(echoing):
...on Earth as it is in Heaven.
Give us this day
our daily bread
and forgive us
our trespasses,
(growling)
as we forgive those
who trespass against us,
(praying inaudibly)
...and lead us not
into temptation...
(cheering)
(cheering gets louder)
(sharp ringing)
(crowd screaming)
St. Anthony, disperser
of devils, pray for us.
St. Anthony, reviver
of the dead, pray for us.
(speaking in Spanish)
St. Anthony,
tamer of tyrants,
pray for us.
(growls)
From the snares of the devil,
St. Anthony deliver us.
From thunder,
lightning and storms...
(growling)
...St. Anthony deliver us.
Lamb of God, who takes away
the sins of the world,
spare us, O Lord.
I'm tired.
(growling continues)
(grunts)
(praying in Spanish)
(growls)
Give us this day
our daily bread.
(snarling)
Tired of spending my life
looking over my shoulder,
watching you hurt my family.
(growls)
I'm tired of letting you win!
(inhales)
You want me?
Come and get me.
*
(roars)
...restorer of sight
to the blind, pray for us.
St. Anthony...
(speaking in Spanish)
(demonic voice):
Do it. Snuff the bitch!
Right in front
of her squealing pups.
I'm not going to kill you.
St. Anthony,
tamer of tyrants...
I'm going to save you.
The Morning Star
sends his greetings.
And I send mine.
(choking)
(coughing, gasping)
Yield to God!
You can't do this.
(grunting)
You have no right!
You're just a damned woman!
TOMAS: Yield to God!
(screams)
Yield to God!
(crunches)
(snaps)
(screaming)
(girls sob)
Son of the morning, banished
from grace, you are forgiven.
Son of the morning,
profane thing, ashes
on the earth, you are redeemed.
(crying)
Outcast, fallen angel,
you are loved.
(screaming)
SALESMAN (crying):
No, don't...
don't leave me...
Rags? Don't
leave me. Rags?
(crying):
Don't...
(shouting):
Ra...
*
HENRY:
Hey, Angie...
KAT:
Oh, my God...
Angie?
Mom!
Oh, my God...
KAT:
No...
(girls crying)
CASEY:
So I guess this is it.
What?
I spent God knows
how many hours
staring at that damn
face of yours,
all snotted up,
half the time
trying to bite me.
Much prefer this version.
The other people you, um...
...rescued.
Like me.
Do you ever keep tabs on them?
I tried.
Best I could.
How many got better?
Some.
Not all.
Some people...
(sighs)
...they stay in
that pain forever,
'cause they don't think
anyone else will believe them.
Or understand
what they went through.
So how do you get past it?
(exhales)
You tell yourself,
I'm still here.
And I'll be here tomorrow
and the day after.
And it wasn't my fault.
'Cause that's the deal
we make with the world
every time we get out of bed
in the morning.
Hurt me all you want,
but the bastards
don't get to win.
(voice breaking):
What if I'm not strong enough?
Then I'd say that, in the 40-odd
years I've been doing this...
...I've never seen anyone
fight longer or harder
than Casey Rance.
You might just be
the strongest person
I've ever met in my whole life.
HENRY:
Case.
Time to go, honey.
(whispering):
Thank you.
Remember that.
They don't get to win.
(car door opens, closes)
REPORTER:
...new amateur footage
has been released
of the event that claimed
one man's life
following last week's
papal parade...
I'm surprised
you didn't skedaddle
off to Rome
with the rest of them.
You Know Who
certainly didn't hang around.
You do realize that defacing
a Bible is sacrilege.
Redacting.
(clears throat)
Not defacing.
There's a difference.
Half of the book
is full of bird drawings.
Oh!
That. Oh, yeah.
That part's defacing.
I'll be in touch.
Do try to stay
out of trouble.
Where will you start?
Oof. Wherever the wind takes me.
Uh, I might get lucky,
Pop up in the visions
of some other priest.
Preferably one who also
appreciates the subtle nuances
of Nicolas Cage.
What if I asked you to stay?
Train me.
To become an exorcist.
Understand what
you're asking, Tomas.
There's no
retirement home
for people like us.
You go after them,
they hunt you down.
They strip you
of everything you hold dear.
Sooner or later, you'll die
in some stinking room,
with one of those things
standing over you.
I know the costs.
Then why?
The demon.
When it died.
For just a moment...
...I saw God.
I saw His true face.
That's how they get you.
First hit's always free.
How is it that you always manage
to get exactly what you want?
We had a minor setback.
Simon is dead.
Sebastian's alive.
Sebastian was never
the finish line.
And Simon got greedy.
We are not going
to make the same mistake.
I don't know why.
But He chose me.
And I am going
to get out of the boat
and start walking.
Oh, well, then.
In that case...
*
(birds chirping)
(Casey and Kat speaking
indistinctly)
How do you feel?
Safe.
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH